---
slug: gs-the-action
title: The Actions
tags: [blazor, actions, state-management, isafeaction, performance, statepulse, csharp, .net]
sidebar_position: 3
---

## Type of Actions
There is 2 type of action in StatePulse ```IAction``` and ```ISafeAction```.

### `IAction` – Regular and Lightweight Actions



`IAction` represents a **standard action** in the system. These are the **most common type of actions** and **do not include any built-in safety mechanisms** like debouncing, deduplication, or self-cancellation.

> ⚠️ You should **not** wrap everything in `ISafeAction` just for peace of mind.  
> `IAction` exists for a reason — **performance**.

```csharp title="IncrementCounterResultAction.cs"
using StatePulse.Net;
public record IncrementCounterResultAction : IAction
{
    public int Count { get; init; } 
}
```

#### ✅ When to Use

Use `IAction` when:

- You want maximum performance
- The action does not require race condition protection
- It's okay if the action is triggered multiple times
- You’re working with local state or UI updates


*You should note that IAction is record and is not recommended to add constructor arguments because of the way Dispatch works.*

---

### `ISafeAction` – Safe Execution for Critical Actions

`ISafeAction` enforces **safe execution** of a given action to:

- Prevent **duplicate triggers**
- Avoid **race conditions**
- Maintain **consistent state**
- Support **self-cancellation** of outdated executions

This is ideal for scenarios like **API calls**, where a user might interact rapidly with the UI (e.g. clicking buttons multiple times or navigating too quickly). Without safety, the **first action's result** might arrive *after* the **second one**, and still update the state — causing inconsistency.

```csharp title="IncrementCounterAction.cs"
using StatePulse.Net;
public record IncrementCounterAction : ISafeAction
{
    public int Delay { get; init; }
}
```

#### ⚠️ Performance Consideration

Not all actions need to be safe.

Using `ISafeAction` introduces a **small performance overhead**, such as managing token lifecycles or task state tracking. This overhead is generally negligible, but unnecessary for:

- Simple state updates
- Fire-and-forget logic
- Operations that are safe to duplicate

**Use it only when necessary**, especially for actions where **result timing and state consistency matter** (like network requests).

